5238 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024
PDQN: User Preference-Based Charging
Station Recommendation
Hai Lin , Member, IEEE,X i a o y uL i,Y u eC a o , Senior Member, IEEE, Houda Labiod, Senior Member, IEEE,
and Naveed Ahmad , Member, IEEE
Abstract—With the advent of consumer electronics, Electric
Vehicles (EVs) are gradually becoming representative carriers
for the next generation of consumer electronics. EVs are gaining
market share compared to traditional fuel vehicles. This paper
works on charging station (CS) recommendation to improve the
charging experience. However, there is uncertainty that EV users
follow exactly the CS recommendation from operation system,
and this thereby degrades the performance of CS recommen-
dation system. To address this issue, we extend the Markov
Decision Process (MDP) model by integrating user preference
(e.g., prefer the nearest CS). Then, we propose a neural network-
based framework to solve the established model, in which we
use a Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) module to capture
user preference features and an attention module to establish
the relationship between the preference features and system state
features. Based on these modules, a user Preference-based Deep
Q Network (PDQN) is designed to solve the established CS
recommendation model. Our simulation results demonstrate that
our proposition can bring better performance in terms of average
charging time and rewards, by comparing it with the nearest
mechanism, the minimum queuing mechanism and the DQN
mechanism without preference.
Index Terms—Electric vehicles, charging station recommenda-
tion, user preference, deep reinforcement learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
I
N THE face of challenges posed by energy shortage and
climate change, Electric Vehicles (EVs) have been getting
more attention currently. EVs represent a new generation of
transportation and a new type of consumer electronics [1].
They are highly popular in the consumer electronics market
because of their low price and improved user experience [2].
The global number of EVs was more than 7 million in
2019, and in the future, it is expected to increase rapidly to
Manuscript received 23 February 2024; revised 30 March 2024, 17 April
2024, and 30 April 2024; accepted 5 June 2024. Date of publication
12 June 2024; date of current version 11 December 2024. This work was
supported in part by the Hubei Province Key Research and Development
Program under Grant 2023BAB022, and in part by the Hubei Province
International Science and Technology Collaboration Program under Grant
2022EHB002. (Corresponding author: Yue Cao.)
Hai Lin, Xiaoyu Li, and Yue Cao are with the Key Laboratory of Aerospace
Information Security and Trusted Computing, Ministry of Education,
and the School of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University,
Wuhan 430072, China (e-mail: lin.hai@whu.edu.cn; xiaoyu.li@whu.edu.cn;
cao.yue@whu.edu.cn).
Houda Labiod is with Huawei Technologies France SAS, 92100 Boulogne-
Billancourt, France (e-mail: houda.labiod@huawei.com).
Naveed Ahmad is with the College of Computer and Information
Sciences, Prince Sultan University, Riyadh 12435, Saudi Arabia
(e-mail: nahmed@psu.edu.sa).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TCE.2024.3413044
130 million in 2030 [3]. As a result, it is required to deal
with a large number of charging requests sent by EV users
when EVs are going to run out of battery [4]. However, due to
long charging cycles, inappropriate selection of an overloaded
Charging Station (CS) may lead to poor charging efﬁciency
(e.g., longer waiting time and driving time). Therefore, CS
recommendation that guides an EV to an appropriate CS
is critical to improving the user charging experience and
balancing the charging load on CSs.
by considering both the system’s current information (CS
information and EV information) and the prediction of future
requests. Recommendation modeling plays a crucial role in
enhancing charging performance. Previous works model the
CS recommendation problem as game theory [9], linear pro-
gramming (LP) [10] and Pareto optimization [11],e t c .Y e t ,t h e
most popular modeling to solve the decision process is based
on the Markov Decision Process (MDP) model [12]. It makes
the recommendation for online arrived charging requests by
taking account of the system’s current information and future
Previous works on EV charging focus on the overload CSs
scheduling problem, i.e., determining the appropriate charging
and discharging time for EVs so that they do not violate
grid constraints while maintaining acceptable user satisfac-
tion [5], [6]. Differently, the CS (or charging) recommendation
problem determines an optimal CS for an EV to achieve the
objectives, such as charging cost minimization [7],g r i dv i o -
lation minimization [6], and charging time minimization [8].
For instance, when an EV is going to run out of battery,
the nearest CS is desirable to be recommended. However, if
the chosen CS is overloaded, the user charging experience
will be degraded. Simply choosing the least loaded CS could
still lead to inefﬁciency, as it could be far away from the
user. These types of greedy selections lead to inefﬁciency
in CS recommendation. To improve the recommendation
performance, it is important to model the CS recommendation
events.
1558-4127
It is well known that the MDP has the issue of the
‘curse of dimensionality’. To address this issue in the CS
recommendation scenario, a multiple-phase MDP is proposed
to reduce the state space and state transition complexities [13].
A more general method to address the ‘curse of dimen-
sionality’ issue is to resort to Deep Reinforcement Learning
(DRL) [14], [15], such as using Deep Q Network (DQN) to
ﬁnd the optimal CS [14] and designing a graph DRL to solve
the CS recommendation problem, which is formulated as a
sequential decision-making model [15].
©c 2024 IEEE. Personal use is permitted, but republication/redistribution requires IEEE permission.
See https://www.ieee.org/publications/rights/index.html for more information.
LIN et al.: PDQN: USER PREFERENCE-BASED CS RECOMMENDATION 5239
Fig. 1. CS recommendation scenario.
These DRL-based CS recommendation works are carried
out on the assumption that all users follow exactly the system
recommendation. However, in reality, some users may not
follow the CS recommended by the system, but the CS they
prefer, such as a closer CS or a CS with fast charging. This
feature is called user preference in this paper. User preference
would introduce uncertainty to the recommendation system,
since the recommended CSs may not followed by the users.
If the DRL system does not take into account this uncertainty,
the system’s performance will degrade. We take an example
to discuss this phenomenon. In a simple scenario where two
CSs, CS 1 and CS 2, are located in the area, as shown in
Fig. 1. Assume that both CSs have one place available for
charging and a user (u1) who locates between both CSs but
nearer to CS1 is requesting charging. Without considering user
preference, the system should recommend u1 to CS1. However,
if the system can predict that a future user (u2) has a high
probability of selecting CS 1 (its preferred CS) and arriving at
CS1 earlier, a recommendation with CS 1 to u1 is no longer a
good choice. Instead, the system should recommend u1 to CS2
although this increases the charging time for u1, but minimizes
the total charging time.
This example shows that the recommendation performance
degrades if the system does not take into account user
preference. Therefore, designing a recommendation model that
integrates user preference is critical for the recommendation
system when applied in practice. To address this issue, we
extend the MDP model by considering user preference in CS
selection, i.e., establishing a new MDP model by integrating
user preference. Then, we propose a user preference-based
Deep Q Network (PDQN) algorithm to solve the established
model. A challenge raised in our work is to effectively extract
the preference features and correctly establish the relationship
between the extracted preference features and the system state
features.
The contributions of this paper are summarized as follows:
• User preference introduces uncertainty to CS rec-
ommendation system. This uncertainty could degrade
dramatically recommendation performance if it is not
taken into account. To address this issue, we formulate
the CS recommendation problem as an extended MDP
model, which integrates user preference. This model, by
taking account of uncertainty, enables the system to select
optimal CSs for users in terms of overall charging time
minimization.
• To solve the extended MDP model, we propose a DQN-
based algorithm (PDQN). The challenge of the algorithm
is to extract automatically user preference from users’
previous actions on CS selection. To do this, a Long
Short-Term Memory (LSTM) module which can capture
users’ historic behaviors is introduced to generate auto-
matically the preference features. Moreover, an attention
module is designed to establish the relationship between
the preference features and the system state features, to
enable the algorithm to output an optimal recommenda-
tion for users.
The rest of this article is organized as follows. Section II
brieﬂy summarizes the related research works. Section III
describes the extended MDP model for CS recommendation.
Section IV designs the PDQN algorithm. Section V analyzes
the performance of our proposition. Section VI concludes our
work and gives the prospects.
II. R ELATED WORK
Many CS recommendation/scheduling works have been
carried out to solve EV charging and path planning prob-
lems. These works aim at minimizing the traveling time,
queuing time, and charging price. To achieve accurate rec-
ommendation/scheduling, it is important to collect the system
information, such as EV’s state [16], user’s willingness to
charge, and CS information. But the key is to design an
appropriate recommendation/scheduling model and algorithm.
Game theory-based modeling and machine learning-based
modeling are two methods that have been widely studied
previously.
A. Traditional CS Recommendation
A typical CS recommendation system is proposed in [17],
in which four modules are designed: a Power System Control
Center (PSCC), an Intelligent Transportation System (ITS)
center, CSs, and EV terminals. The EVs use broadcast data
from the ITS center, which contains information such as the
states of the trafﬁc system and the grid, to determine an
optimal route, so as to minimize the total serving time. This
system relies on First In First Serve (FIFS), in which an EV
arrives earlier and receives the charge service earlier. The
work in [18] designs an Urgency First Charging (UFC) policy,
which classiﬁes the charging priority based on the urgency of
upcoming EVs. The priority level is calculated based on the
EV’s energy demand, and remaining parking time.
Authorized licensed use limited to: UNIVERSITAS GADJAH MADA. Downloaded on July 28,2026 at 10:36:36 UTC from IEEE Xplore.  Restrictions apply. 
5240 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024
The CS recommendation problem can be usually considered
as the competition among EVs. Hence, game theory is often
used for recommendation modeling. The authors in [19] pro-
pose a charging navigation framework based on a hierarchical
game approach. It takes account of the impacts of both the
power system and the transportation system. At the high
level of the hierarchical model, a non-cooperative game is
designed to model the competition between CSs. Multiple
evolutionary games are formulated at the low level to evolve
CS selection strategies. Similarly, an EV charging navigation
strategy that takes into account the idle rate and dynamic tariff
is proposed in [20]. CS recommendation is performed with the
goal of minimizing the comprehensive cost of charging time
and dynamic charging price.
B. DRL-Based CS Recommendation
The above methods are designed for deterministic environ-
ment, ignoring unforeseen deviations caused by ﬂuctuating
trafﬁc conditions and the unpredictable duration of CS queuing
time. Since the randomness of trafﬁc conditions and charging
queuing time signiﬁcantly impacts the effectiveness of CS
recommendation and scheduling, effectively selecting CS is a
big challenge [21].
In stochastic environments, decision problems are often
modeled as MDP problem, which is the basic formulation
of Reinforcement Learning (RL). In [22], the EV charg-
ing/discharging scheduling problem is formulated as an MDP
model with unknown transition probability. The state includes
electricity price, EV location and State of Charge (SoC), while
the rewards are deﬁned as charging cost. The work in [23]
also uses MDP to handle randomness in CS recommendation.
They deﬁne the system state by including residual electricity
and parking time, and solve the model by a RL algorithm.
DRL is considered as a powerful tool to address the
issue of large state space. DRL embodies a combination of
the decision-making capabilities of RL and the perceptual
capabilities of deep learning, enabling it to solve sophistical
problems of sequential decision-making. The work in [24]
proposes a system for real-time EV charging navigation based
on a graph DRL. This system aims at minimizing traveling
time and charging costs. The work in [25] proposes a modiﬁed
rainbow-based DRL approach to realize the optimal scheduling
of CS. The algorithm combines the advantages of several
techniques, including double DQN, multi-step learning, and
learning rate decay strategy to improve its performance.
DRL is capable of solving the large state space issue, even
though, it is still inefﬁcient to apply vanilla DRL to the
large action space scenario. Unfortunately, in metropolises,
the number of CSs could extend into several hundred, which
leads to a large action space for CS recommendation [26].
To address this issue, multi-agent DRL is applied to this
domain. The authors in [27] propose a multi-agent actor-critic
framework for CS recommendation. In this framework, each
CS serves as an individual agent and a centralized attentive
critic is designed to coordinate the recommendation between
agents. To quantify the inﬂuence of future potential charging
competition caused by other agents, the authors introduce a
delayed access strategy to exploit the knowledge of future
charging competition during training. Different from the above
multi-agent actor-critic framework, the multi-object framework
is proposed to solve the multi-agent problem in [28].W i t h
a continuous action space, the MDP is solved by the twin
delayed deep deterministic policy gradient algorithm (TD3).
While ensuring the maximum beneﬁt of the EV A, the multi-
object framework also ensures minimal ﬂuctuation in the
micro-grid exchange power.
C. CS Recommendation Based on User Preference
Some previous works on CS recommendation have
taken into account user preference. They take for exam-
ple convenience [29], price sensitivity [30], and historical
trajectories [31] as user preference. In [32], the authors
use quantile regression models to analyze different factors
impacts on user preference. The study shows that charging
habit, CS availability, and CS accessibility to subway sta-
tions are important factors affecting the charging choices.
Alternatively, the authors in [33] take charging speed, cost,
network compatibility, and amenities as user preference, and
use the restricted Boltzmann machine-learning algorithm for
CS recommendation. User preferences on different criteria
form multi-dimensional preferences in [34]. This also leads to
a multi-objective optimization model for CS recommendation,
which could be solved by NSGA-III algorithm [34].Y e t ,t h e
authors in [35] think deep-learning based algorithm is powerful
to handle user preference. Hence, they design a Rectangle
Actor-Critic (RAC) framework for CS recommendation. The
results demonstrate that deep-learning algorithm works well
for user preference consideration.
However, these works have two limitations. One is to
assume that the users would inform their preference to the
system. This assumption limits the applicability of CS recom-
mendation system. Instead, the system should be capable to
extract users preference based on their previous CS selections.
Second, previous works assume that all users always follow
the recommended CS, but it is not always the case. In practice,
some users may not follow the recommended CS and choose
another CS because of user preference. User preference could
introduce uncertainty into the CS recommendation system.
To ﬁll these gaps, we aim to characterize automatically user
preference and use it as a crucial factor in addressing the
uncertainty of CS recommendation.
III. CS R ECOMMENDATION PROCESS AND MODEL
A. CS Recommendation Process
In our proposition, the CS recommendation system is a
central sever which collects the necessary information and
recommends a CS for charging requests (Fig. 2). The collected
information includes the CS’s location, number of EVs waiting
in CSs, number of EVs traveling to CSs, type of CS, EV’s
location and residual electricity. The information about CSs
are collected via cameras and sensors installed in CSs, while
the information about EV is sent through APP of in-EV home
screen. The system’s state is updated by the event trigger, e.g.,
the arrival/departure of EV to a CS or the charging request
LIN et al.: PDQN: USER PREFERENCE-BASED CS RECOMMENDATION 5241
Fig. 2. Flow chart of CS recommendation system.
of an EV . Our system is designed for the case where the CS
operator and EV manufacture are the same, and also the case
where they are different. In the latter case, it only needs to
install the system APP on the in-EV home screen to get the
necessary information required by our model [36], [37].T h e
CS recommendation process is as follows:
1) when an EV is going to run out of battery, the EV user
sends a charging request to the recommendation system
via an APP;
2) upon receiving a charging request, the recommendation
system makes a decision based on the state of system
and sends this decision (recommendation) to the request-
ing EV;
3) the EV conﬁrms this decision and drives towards the
recommended CS.
B. System State
As aforementioned, we characterize CS recommendation
as MDP. The MDP model typically constitutes a 5-tuple
(K, S, A, P, R). K symbolizes the decision cycle, S represents
a set of states, A represents the action space (decisions), P
characterizes the state transition probability and R denotes the
reward. At each step, a decision is made based on the current
system state and predictions of its subsequent states. Upon
making a decision, the system receives rewards and evolves
to the next state according to the transition probability. This
process is repeated until a predeﬁned number of iterations is
reached or the system converges. The sequence of decisions is
referred as policy π. The objective of the MDP is to determine
the optimal policy that maximizes the overall rewards. The
parameters used in this subsection are shown in Table I.
In our proposal, the system state (st ∈ S, t = 0, 1,... )
consists of CS information, EV information, and trafﬁc load
level. The state at step t is deﬁned as a tuple st ≜(ζt, vt, kt).
ζt = (cs1,t, cs2,t,..., csn,t) is the state of n CSs at time t.
csi,t ={ ci, typei, qui, owi} deﬁnes the state of the CS i at time
t, where ci ∈ [1, maxc
i ] represents the capacity of CS i (maxc
i
represents the max capacity of CS i). typei indicates the CS
type, e.g., fast charging CS. qui denotes the number of EVs
waiting for charging at the CS i. owi represents the number of
EVs that have been recommended previously but are still on
the way to the CS i. vt represents the sub-state of the requesting
EV , which is a two-tuple (lt, et). lt ∈{ l1, l2, l3,..., lm}
denotes the location where the EV is requesting charging.
et ∈{ 1, 2, 3,..., emax} denotes the EV’s residual energy level
repenting SoC. Finally, kt ∈{ 1, 2, 3} represents the trafﬁc load
TABLE I
PARAMETER SETTING 1
level at time t, where 1 denotes the light level of trafﬁc load,
2 denotes the moderate level of trafﬁc load and 3 denotes the
heavy level of trafﬁc load.
C. Action and Transition Probability
The recommendation system takes an action for each state
st. We deﬁne the action set as A ={ a1, a2,..., an}, where ai
denotes the decision of recommending the CS i to a requesting
EV . According to the current state st = (ζt, vt, kt), take action
at at st to reach the next state st+1 = (ζt+1, vt+1, kt+1).T h e
probability P(st+1|st, at) is transition probability from st to
st+1 by the agent taking an action at. At each state, the
user selects an action and receives rewards. Then, the system
evolves to the next state.
D. User’s Preference
The recommendation system selects a CS for a requesting
user, but the user may not follow the recommendation and
select his preferred CS (e.g., a CS with which he is more
familiar), instead of the recommended CS. We denote ˆa as the
action (the recommended CS) selected by the system, while ˇa
as the user’s preferred action (preferred CS).
The user selects a ﬁnal action by taking account of both
actions. Namely, the ﬁnal decision is made based on both
the recommended action and preferred action. We deﬁne the
probability of taking the recommendation action and preferred
action as ˆP and ˇP respectively. Then, the actual taking action
is deﬁned as a:
a =
{
ˆa w.p. ˆP
ˇa w.p. ˇP (1)
If we consider the system as a function f , then at state s,t h e
system obtains the action ˆa by considering user’s preference
p as:
aˆ = f(s, p) (2)
5242 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024
The user’s preference function is denoted as fp. This can be
deﬁned as for example that a user prefers to go to the nearest
CS. At state s, the user’s preferred action ˇa is determined by:
ˇa = fp(s) (3)
We aim to ﬁnd an optimal policy π∗ : (s, p) → a which can
determine a best action a∗ when a user requests charging for
its vehicle at state s and with his preference p. According to
equations (1), (2) and (3), the policy π is determined by both
the system function and the preference function. We deﬁne
π ≜/Gamma1(f, fp) and have:
π(s, p) = a (4)
In our work, the optimal policy π∗ minimizes the total
overall charging time. It is deﬁned as the time interval from
when the user requests charging to the time when EV charging
is ﬁnished. This time interval includes traveling time (τtr),
queuing time (τqu), and charging time (τch). Therefore, when
a user with preference p takes action a at state s, the received
reward is calculated as:
ra(s, p) = 1
τtr + τqu + τch
(5)
We deﬁne Rπ (s, p) as the expected total rewards at state s
with the preference p under the policy π.
Rπ (s, p) = ra(s, p) +
∑
s′∈S,p′∈P
λpt
(
s′, p′|s, a
)
Rπ (
s′, p′)
(6)
where a = π(s, p), s′is the next state, λ (<1) is a constant dis-
count factor and pt is transition probability. The parameter p′
represents the preference of the next user which is independent
of (s, a), so the equation can be rewritten as:
Rπ(s, p) = ra(s, p) +
∑
s′∈S,p′∈P
λpt
(
s′|s, a
)
pt
(
p′)
Rπ (
s′, p′)
(7)
Our objective is to derive a policy, so as to maximize the
expected total rewards for each state under each preference.
π∗ = arg max
π
Rπ (s, p), ∀ (s, p) (8)
As aforementioned, π is determined by function f and
function fp, where fp is predeﬁned. For instance, some users
prefer the nearest CS, so for these users, fp outputs the nearest
CS as the action ˇa. Therefore, π only depends on the function
f , and so equation (8) can be re-written as:
f∗ = arg max
f
Rπ(s, p), ∀ (s, p) (9)
In the above equation, the preference is deﬁned as an
input parameter. We could deﬁne different values for different
preferences, e.g., ‘1’ represents the preference of the nearest
CS, ‘2’ represents the preference ofthe minimum queuing time
CS, and so on. However, according to our experiences, this
deﬁnition can not achieve good performance. Then, we let
the system extract the preference based on two parameters
by itself: the recommended action ˆa and the ﬁnal selected
action a. We believe the relationship between these two actions
indicates the preference of a user. A simple example is that
Fig. 3. CS recommendation framework.
if the recommended action is always the same as the selected
action, it implies that the related users have no preference for
CS and they always follow the recommended CS. Therefore,
we deﬁne φ : (ˆa, a) → p, and equation (9) is then written as:
(
f∗,φ ∗)
= arg max
f,φ
Rπ (
s, ˆa, a
)
∀,( s, p) (10)
In the next section, we use PDQN algorithm to ﬁnd the
optimal (f∗,φ ∗).
IV . PDQN A LGORITHM
In our work, we use PDQN to solve the established model.
To do this, we ﬁrst establish a framework for our system.
A. Framework and PDQN Networks
We deﬁne our CS recommendation framework as shown
in Fig. 3.T h e preference extraction module represents the
function φ. It takes the actions ˆa and a as input and outputs
the preference p.T h e system function module that represents
the function f taking the input of the current state s and a user’s
preference p, and outputs the rewards (Rπ function deﬁned in
equation (7)) for each possible action a ∈ A. The module then
recommends the action ˆa which has the highest probability.
The selection module will select an action between the
action ˆa and his preferred action ˇa which is determined using
the preference function by taking account of the current state s.
In the CS recommendation framework, the preference
extraction module plays a crucial role. The user preference
determines the ﬁnal chosen CS. Therefore, it can be derived
from the user previous selections of CS. This is why in our
preference extraction module, the recommended action ˆa and
the ﬁnal selected action a serve as input to the preference
extraction module. Since user privacy should be protected in
recommendation system [38], [39],w eh a v ew o r k e do nt h e
privacy issue in our previous work [40]. In PDQN, with the
preference extraction module, user preference is not leaked to
the system, so we also achieve to protect user privacy to some
extents.
However, only based on the individual pair (ˆa, a),i ti s
difﬁcult to derive the accurate preference feature. We believe
that this feature also lies in users’ successive selections.
In consequence, we need to extract the features from the
users’ successive selections. Since LSTM can extract both the
features of one input and the features along the sequence of
LIN et al.: PDQN: USER PREFERENCE-BASED CS RECOMMENDATION 5243
Fig. 4. PDQN networks of framework.
input as well, we use this network as the preference extraction
module. It is possible to design one LSTM for all types of
users. However, it cannot achieve good performance according
to experience [41]. This is why, we assign one LSTM for one
user type (as shown in Fig. 3). The network is then switched
to the corresponding LSTM according to the user sample.
For normal DRL, the input to deep network is just the
system state, while in our framework, both the state and
preference (feature) serve as the inputs. A simple way to
establish the correlation between the state and preference is
to concatenate both the state vector and preference vector, but
this cannot establish well the relationship between preference
features and system state features. To address this issue, we
introduce an attention module in our system function module.
In this module, we use the attention approach to approximate
the feature distribution and gain the relationship weights,
which can be learned adaptively to combine system state and
preference features. After generating the combined feature of
state and preference, it serves as an input to the fully connected
neural network, where we set six layers for this network and
each layer has 128 neurons. Moreover, a residual network
is deﬁned in this module. Each residual block contains two
fully connected layers. Residual networks can prevent gradient
disappearance and network degradation problems in deep
neural networks and allow our PDQN networks to perform
well.
B. Algorithm
To recommend an optimal action, we need to train the two
neural networks deﬁned in our recommendation framework,
namely the preference extraction network and the system
function network. We denote θf ,θφ as the network parameters
for preference extraction and system function networks. The
training procedure tunes the two parameters to the optimal
(θ∗
f ,θ ∗
φ), which represent the optimal functions (f∗,φ ∗).
Similar to the DQN, PDQN deﬁnes two networks (as shown in
Fig. 4), the Main network and the target network. The former
is the main network to recommend an optimal action and the
latter is used for training.
The target action-value y is calculated using (11) with the
target network.
y = ra(s, p) + η max
a′
Q
(
s′, p′; a′)
(11)
Algorithm 1 PDQN Algorithm
Input: input PDQN with random parameters (θf ,θφ),
target network parameters (¯θf , ¯θφ)=(θf ,θφ),
replay memory D
Output: output ﬁnal action a
1 for each charging request do
2 Determine the current state s and the user type tp;
3 Generate the recommendation action ˆa and the
preferred action ˇa;
4 Select the ﬁnal action a according to (1);
5 Receiving the immediate rewards r;
6 Determine the next state s′;
7 for each t=1,T do
8 Generate the recommendation action ˆa′and select
a′ from s′ using target network;
9 Store sample (s, ˆa, a, tp, r, s′, ˆa′, a′, tp′) in
experience replay buffer;
10 Extract preference p, p′ from φ( ˆa, a, tp) and
φ( ˆa′, a′, tp′);
11 Calculate y according to (11) based on target
network;
12 Perform a gradient descent based on the loss
function (12) and update PDQN parameters
(θf ,θφ);
13 Update target network every L steps, ¯θ = θ;
14 end
15 end
where s′, p′, a′ represent the next state, the next preference,
the next action. Then, the squared error loss function (12) is
used for gradient decent.
L
(
θf ,θφ
)
= E
[(
Qθf ,θφ (s, p; a) − y
)2]
(12)
During the training phase, by interacting with the environ-
ment, the experience samples (s, ˆa, a, tp, r, s′, ˆa′, a′, tp′) are
generated and stored in the experience replay buffer. PDQN
algorithm is shown in Algorithm 1.
V. P ERFORMANCE EVA L UAT I O N
In this section, we analyze the performance of our propo-
sition by comparing it with three other CS recommendation
mechanisms, i.e., the nearest mechanism that selects the
closest CS for every requesting EV , the minimum queuing
mechanism that selects the CS that brings the minimum queu-
ing time (τqu), and a deep learning based mechanism similar
to [14] that the system only considers the state information
but no user preference information. We refer it as the DQN
mechanism in our simulation.
We simulate a 1000*800 area Z and ten CSs are randomly
positioned within this area. The area Z is divided by a
V oronoi diagram [13], which includes ten regions denoted
as R1, R2,..., R10. Ten CSs are placed in ten regions, such
as CS1 is positioned at R1, and so on. In this simulation,
we deﬁne ﬁve types of preference (i.e., ﬁve types of users),
including the preference for the nearest CS, the preference for
5244 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024
TABLE II
PREFERENCE SETTING 2
TABLE III
PARAMETER SETTING 3
TABLE IV
PARAMETER SETTING 4
minimum queuing time, the preference for special CS operator,
the preference for fast charging CS, and non-preference users
who always follow the recommendation. Moreover, each type
of user is further divided into three sub-types according to the
selection probabilities as illustrated in Table II. In fact, this is
the implementation of the fp of equation (3) in our simulation
experiment. For instance, the type nearest is divided into three
sub-types which select the nearest CS with probability 10%,
20%, 30%. Namely, users follow the recommended CS with
90%, 80%, 70% probability respectively.
Table III presents the parameter settings. The parameter
μd represents the expected traveling time to a CS within
the same region. If an EV drives to an adjacent CS, the
expected travel time is 2 μd, while driving to a next CS,
the expected travel time is 3 μd, and so on. The μc repre-
sents the expected charging time per unit electricity and μfc
represents the expected charging time for fast charging per
unit electricity (μfc calculated as 0 .2*μc). We deﬁne three
trafﬁc load levels: heavy (k = 3), moderate (k = 2), and light
(k = 1) levels. We denote μa,1 .5μa, and 2μa as the expected
charging request arrival interval for heavy, moderate, and
light levels respectively. The residual energy (SoC) determines
the charging time. For simplicity reasons, we discretize the
residual energy to ﬁve levels (se in Table IV). pe represents
the residual energy level probability when a user requests
charging. τch is denoted as the charging duration for each level,
which is uniformly distributed in the interval deﬁned in the
table.
A. Performance Analysis
In this subsection, we analyze the performance of our
proposition. First, we analyze its computational complexity
by comparing it with DQN mechanism. Since we bring
Fig. 5. Computational complexity analysis.
LSTM and attention module into neural network, the number
of network parameters is larger than DQN (Fig. 5), which
makes PDQN model have higher computational complexity.
However, this increased computation is trivial and PDQN can
well grant the requirement of recommendation latency. As
shown in Fig. 5, by training 40,000 EV charging requests, the
PDQN model spends 1233.5s and the DQN mechanism spends
939.6s, increasing the computation by about 30%. This is
totally acceptable, since the training can be done ofﬂine. Then,
we process10,000 charging requests online. PDQN and DQN
incur 22.46ms and 20.8ms per request on average, respectively.
The increased latency is almost negligible.
In the following, we analyze the performance of our
proposition by comparing it to the three aforementioned
mechanisms. Here, we analyze two criteria, the average reward
per request and the average charging time (τtr +τqu +τch) per
request. First, we ﬁx μd, μc and pˇa to 5, 11 minutes and 0.6
respectively, and vary μa from 6 to 17 minutes.
Fig. 6(a) shows the comparison results of the average reward
per charging request. We observe that the average reward
increases with the increase of μa for all mechanisms. The
increase of μa implies a decrease of the charging request
rate (fewer charging requests), so the charging load on all
CSs is reduced. This makes EVs’ queuing time decrease,
which in turn brings less overall charging time, and so the
average reward increases. We also observe that our proposition
outperforms the others, especially when the value of μa is low
(i.e., high charging request arrival rate).
Unlike the nearest mechanism and the minimum queuing
mechanism that only takes account of the current request
without considering the future requests, our mechanism can
intelligently recommend CS for users by predicting future
arrivals. In consequence, our proposition performs much better
than those two mechanisms. Since the DQN mechanism is also
an intelligent-based mechanism. It also outperforms the nearest
mechanism and the minimum queuing mechanism. However,
the DQN mechanism does not consider users’ preferences, and
so its prediction could be deviated. This makes it perform
worse than our proposition.
Fig. 6(b) describes the performance of the overall average
charging time by varying μa. Since the overall charging time
is inversely proportional to the rewards, we observe that the
overall charging time decreases with the increase of μa as
LIN et al.: PDQN: USER PREFERENCE-BASED CS RECOMMENDATION 5245
Fig. 6. Rewards and charging time analysis by varying μa.
Fig. 7. Variance analysis.
expected. With the small value of μa (high charging load),
the three other mechanisms perform better than the nearest
mechanism. The nearest mechanism always recommends the
nearest CS. This strategy leads to long queuing time when the
CSs are overloaded.
An interesting observation here is that, with μa<7, the
nearest mechanism not only has higher rewards than DQN
and minimum queuing mechanism, but has larger overall
charging time as well. It is true that individual reward is
inversely propositional to the overall charging time. However,
by considering the average value, a mechanism could bring bad
performance for both criteria. We take an example: assuming
with the nearest mechanism, user A and user B have 1 unit
reward and 100 unit rewards respectively, while the minimum
queuing mechanism brings 50 unit rewards for both user A and
B. In this case, the nearest mechanism brings higher rewards,
but also longer overall charging time ((1/1+1/100)>(1/50+
1/50)). This analysis demonstrates if a mechanism brings high
As
value for both average reward and average charging time, it
must have high variance. This is demonstrated in Fig. 7, where
the nearest mechanism has the largest variance (note: to make
the ﬁgure concise, the value of the nearest mechanism has
been divided by 50.)
μa increases, the queuing time of the four mechanisms
decreases. The overall charging time of the nearest mechanism
decreases dramatically. This also demonstrates that the CS load
has small impact on the nearest mechanism. The overall charg-
ing time of the minimum queuing mechanism also decreases
and approaches the DQN. When the charging load is high,
the mechanism could recommend a faraway CS for the users,
leading to a long driving time. When the load decreases, all
CSs become available (no queuing time) and so the mechanism
will recommend the nearest one for users. In consequence, the
increase of μa not only brings the decrease of the queuing
time, but also the driving time as well, which makes the
minimum queuing mechanism exhibit similar behaviors to the
DQN.
Thanks to the intelligence of our mechanism and the DQN
mechanism, they perform much better than the two others.
However, we can observe that all mechanisms bring almost
the same performance when μa>14. The reason is that most
CSs become available when μa>14. In this case, the best
recommended CS is the nearest CS. Therefore, all mechanisms
recommend the nearest CS for users.
Now, we ﬁx μa to 10 minutes and analyze how the
parameter μd impacts the performance. Fig. 8(a) shows that
the average reward by varying μd from 3 to 14 minutes. We
observe that the average reward decreases for all mechanisms
as μd increases. The average reward is inversely proportional
to the overall charging time which is the summation of
the traveling time, the queuing time, and the charging time.
The increase of μd makes the traveling time increased, so
the average reward decreases.
It is noteworthy that the minimum queuing mechanism
decreases much more than the others, because this mech-
anism usually takes a long traveling distance to reach the
recommended CS. The increase of μd makes the traveling
time increased dramatically, leading to a sharp decrease in the
average reward. When μd continues to increase (μd≥7), the
minimum queuing mechanism becomes even worse than the
nearest mechanism.
On the contrary, the nearest mechanism’s rewards decrease
smoothly with the increase of μd, simply because it always
recommends the users to the nearest CSs. Again, we observe
that our proposition performs the best among all mechanisms.
When the traveling time increases, our mechanism will
5246 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024
Fig. 8. Rewards and charging time analysis by varying μd.
Fig. 9. Rewards and charging time analysis by varying μc.
recommend the nearer CS, even though it may have a heavier
load than a faraway CS. Moreover, by considering the users’
preferences, our mechanism can make precise predictions
about each CS’s load in the future. Therefore, it achieves better
performance in terms of the average reward than all other
mechanisms.
Fig. 8(b) shows the results of the overall charging time
vs. μd. As expected, all mechanisms increase their charging
time when μd increases, while our mechanism still brings the
best performance thanks to its intelligent features. Then, the
minimum queuing mechanism and the nearest mechanism have
the opposite behaviors. The former’s charging time increases
signiﬁcantly, while the latter stays almost unchanged with the
increase of μd. We have explained above that the minimum
queuing mechanism could recommend a faraway CS, so
the increase of traveling time makes the overall charging
time increased dramatically. As for the nearest mechanism, it
always recommends the nearest CS, so it is affected slightly
by the increase of traveling time.
Fig. 9(a) shows the reward performance by varying μc (ﬁx
μa and μd to 10 and 5 min). The increase of μc brings the
increase of charging time, which in turn increases the queuing
time for other EVs. This makes all mechanisms decrease the
rewards when μc increases. At a small value of μc,t h eC S s ’
availability is high. Hence, recommending the nearest CS is a
good choice. This is why the nearest mechanism performs well
when μc≤7. Our mechanism performs even slightly better than
the nearest mechanism, because it can distribute EVs evenly
among CSs by considering users’ preferences.
As μc increases, the performance of the nearest mecha-
nism degrades dramatically. Recommending all users to their
nearest CS could easily overload a CS, thus leading to long
queuing and charging time. In contrast, the two intelligent
mechanisms recommend users to a less load CS by considering
future charging requests. They perform better and better with
the increase of μc. By considering users’ preferences, our
mechanism recommends an appropriate CS for a user if the
user has a preferred CS. Moreover, the decision made by our
mechanism also takes account of future arrival of charging
requests with users’ preferences. All these features make our
mechanism outperform the others for all μc.
Fig. 9(b) shows the overall charging time vs.μc. We observe
that μc has small impact on all mechanisms except the nearest
mechanism. As explained above, the increase of μc leads to
the increase of charging time and queuing time. If all EVs
are recommended to the nearest CS, this increase can easily
LIN et al.: PDQN: USER PREFERENCE-BASED CS RECOMMENDATION 5247
Fig. 10. Rewards and charging time analysis by varying pˇa.
overload CSs. Therefore, the nearest mechanism increases the
overall charging time dramatically with μc. As for the mini-
mum queuing mechanism, it selects a CS with the least waiting
time, so the increase of charging time will not be accumulated.
In consequence, the minimum queuing mechanism’s overall
charging time increases smoothly with μc. Our mechanism
and the DQN mechanism perform similarly to the minimum
queuing mechanism. This implies that they select a CS with
the least waiting time for charging. By taking account of users’
preferences, our mechanism always performs the best.
In summary, the two intelligent mechanisms outperform the
other non-intelligent mechanisms, because they take account
of the current and future states of the whole system. That is,
if a CS is overloaded or will be overloaded, the intelligent
mechanisms would probably not recommend this CS for the
current charging request. The minimum queuing mechanism
can only take account of the current state of CSs but no future
states. This makes it work better than the nearest mechanism,
but worse than two intelligent mechanisms. By considering
the users’ preferences, our mechanism makes more accurate
predictions of the future states, which makes our mechanism
perform the best for all scenarios.
B. Analysis of User Preference
In this subsection, we investigate how users’ preferences
impact performance. We vary the parameter pˇa from 0.1 to
0.9 to study the performance in terms of the average reward
and the overall charging time. The value of pˇa determines the
probability that a user selects his preferred CS. For example,
if pˇa is 0.1, there is a 10% probability for the user to select
his or her preferred CS instead of the recommended CS.
Fig. 10(a) shows the comparison performance in terms of
average reward. With the increase of pˇa, i.e., more users do
not follow the recommendation, the rewards of both the nearest
mechanism and the minimum queuing mechanism increase
instead. This is because not following the recommendation
makes the charging requests distributed more evenly on all
CSs. We observe that the probabilitypˇa signiﬁcantly affects the
nearest mechanism. Whenpˇa>0.3, the nearest mechanism brings
more and more rewards compared to the minimum queuing
mechanism. This implies that when the charging requests are
uniformly distributed, it is better to select the nearest CS for
charging.
In contrast, our proposition and the DQN mechanism’s
rewards decrease with pˇa, simply because both mechanisms
make less accurate predictions on the system state when more
users do not follow the recommendation. However, both mech-
anisms still outperform two other non-intelligent mechanisms,
even when most of the users (90% in the ﬁgure) selects the
CSs with their own preference. As for our proposition, by
taking account of user preference, it can make predictions on
users’ selection of the CS. As a result, it performs much better
than the DQN mechanism.
Fig. 10(b) shows the average overall charging time by
varying pˇa. We observe the opposite phenomenon compared
to Fig. 10(a), i.e., charging time of two non-intelligent mech-
anisms decreases with the increase of pˇa, while the two
intelligent mechanisms increase the charging time instead. We
have explained above that at a low value of pˇa, the nearest
mechanism could easily overload some CSs, and so it degrades
the performance. When pˇa increases, the charging requests
will be distributed more evenly among all CSs. Therefore, the
nearest and the minimum queuing mechanisms decrease the
charging time. This decrease is not due to the load of CSs,
but rather the decrease of traveling time. In other words, the
queuing mechanism may recommend a faraway CS to users,
which could lead to a long traveling time. If the users follow
their preferences, the traveling time could be simply decreased.
We observe that the gap between two intelligent mecha-
nisms increases ﬁrst and then decreases. That is, when the
value of pˇa increases, our mechanism becomes better and bet-
ter compared to DQN. The gap becomes largest whenpˇa is 0.6.
Afterwards, our mechanism’s charging time increases sharply,
so the gap decreases. The reason is, with small pˇa,m o s tu s e r s
follow the recommendation, there is small difference between
the two mechanisms. With the increase of pˇa, our mechanism
brings better performance thanks to its consideration of user
preference. As pˇa continues to increase, most users follow their
preference, which makes all mechanisms have little effect on
users’ selection.
In the following, we analyze the performance in a scenario
where a part of users select the CSs for charging directly, i.e.,
5248 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024
Fig. 11. Rewards and charging time analysis by varying pw.
without informing the recommendation system. We introduce
pw to represent the probability that users select CSs without
recommendation system. For example, if pw is set to 0.25,
there are 25% of users who select their CSs without recom-
mendation system, while the remaining 75% of users send
the charging requests to the recommendation system. In this
simulation, we ﬁx pˇa to 0.6 and vary pw from 0.0 to 0.5 to
study the performance.
Fig. 11(a) shows the comparison performance in terms of
average rewards. When pw increases, i.e., more users select
their preferred CSs without recommendation system, both
the nearest and minimum queuing mechanisms bring more
rewards. The reason is similar to the pˇa scenario. That is, the
charging requests are distributed more evenly among all CSs
when more users select CSs without recommendation system.
When pw>0.25, the nearest mechanism performs better than
the minimum queuing mechanism. This implies if the charging
requests tend to be uniformly distributed, selecting the nearest
CS has advantage over the minimum queuing CS.
We also observe that two intelligent mechanisms stay
almost unchanged when pw is varied. This demonstrates that
the intelligent mechanisms can learn dynamically from the
environment. Namely, even though both mechanisms are not
informed of charging events by several users, they still can
learn this kind of perturbation from the CSs’ states. This
feature makes them perform much better than non-intelligent
mechanisms.
Fig. 11(b) shows the average overall charging time vs.
pw. As expected, both non-intelligent mechanisms decrease
their charging time with the increase of pw and the nearest
mechanism decreases much more sharply. This demonstrates
again that when the request load tends to be evenly distributed,
it is better to select the nearest CS. Together with Figure 11(a),
we observe when 0.25 <pw<0.5, the nearest mechanism’s
reward and charging time are larger than the minimum queuing
mechanism. We have explained it previously, i.e., the large
variance leads to this phenomenon.
a number of users do not inform their charging events to the
system. This enables them to bring less overall charging time
than the non-intelligent mechanisms. By taking into account
user preferences, our mechanism can bring the least overall
Since the two intelligent mechanisms can learn the per-
turbations from the environment, they can predict future
requests and the transition of the system state, even though
charging time.
In summary, the two non-intelligent mechanisms perform
better when the users follow their preference instead of
the directly CSs without the recommendation system. This
is because, we assign different preference for users, which
makes the charging load distributed more evenly when more
users just select their preferred CSs. On the contrary, the
performance of our mechanism and DQN mechanism degrades
with the increase of pˇa. These two mechanisms can distribute
intelligently the charging load according to the CSs’ current
state and the prediction on the future requests. However, this
estimation on the system state and the prediction of future
arrival become less accurate when more and more users select
their preferred CS. Finally, these two intelligent mechanisms
stay almost unchanged with the change of pw, because they
can learn dynamically the perturbations from the charging
recommendation.
VI. C ONCLUSION
Our work focuses on the CS recommendation in the
scenario where user preference leads to uncertainty in the
recommendation system. To address the uncertainty issue,
we extend the MDP model by taking into account user
preference. Then, we design the PDQN algorithm to solve the
model. In this algorithm, we introduce a LSTM module to
capture users’ preferences automatically. This design brings
intelligence into the recommendation system and makes our
work applicable in practice. However, this mechanism may
not capture accurately user preference if the training data
is not enough. The simulation results demonstrate that, by
taking into account user preference, our proposition can handle
the uncertainty and so outperforms other mechanisms. Since
user privacy must be protected when the recommendation
system is implemented in practice, we will jointly analyze the
uncertainty and privacy issues in our future works. Moreover,
LIN et al.: PDQN: USER PREFERENCE-BASED CS RECOMMENDATION 5249
user preference not only exists in CS recommendation, but
also exists in other recommendation systems, such as online
car-hailing recommendation, and computing service recom-
mendation. We believe that our work can be applied in these
domains, and this will be our future work.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Wang, S. Jiang, D. Ma, Q. Sun, H. Zhang, and P. Wang, “The energy
management of multiport energy router in smart home,” IEEE Trans.
Consum. Electron., vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 344–353, Nov. 2022.
[2] J.-H. Syu, J. C.-W. Lin, G. Srivastava, and K. Yu, “A comprehen-
sive survey on artiﬁcial intelligence empowered edge computing on
consumer electronics,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. , vol. 69, no. 4,
pp. 1023–1034, Nov. 2023.
[3] J. T. J. Burd, E. A. Moore, H. Ezzat, R. Kirchain, and R. Roth,
“Improvements in electric vehicle battery technology inﬂuence vehi-
cle lightweighting and material substitution decisions,” Appl. Energy ,
vol. 283, Feb. 2021, Art. no. 116269.
[4] M. R. Khalid, I. A. Khan, S. Hameed, M. S. J. Asghar, and J. Ro,
“A comprehensive review on structural topologies, power levels, energy
storage systems, and standards for electric vehicle charging stations and
their impacts on grid,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 128069–128094, 2021.
[5] X. Li et al., “Electric vehicle behavior modeling and applications in
vehicle-grid integration: An overview,” Energy, vol. 268, Apr. 2023,
Art. no. 126647.
[6] N. Kumar, V . Saxena, B. Singh, and B. K. Panigrahi, “Power quality
improved grid-interfaced PV-assisted onboard EV charging infrastruc-
ture for smart households consumers,” IEEE Trans. Consum. Electron. ,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 1091–1100, Nov. 2023.
[7] M. Moschella, P. Ferraro, E. Crisostomi, and R. Shorten, “Decentralized
assignment of electric vehicles at charging stations based on personalized
cost functions and distributed ledger technologies,”IEEE Internet Things
J., vol. 8, no. 14, pp. 11112–11122, Jul. 2021.
[8] S. Karakati ˇc, “Optimizing nonlinear charging times of electric vehicle
routing with genetic algorithm,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 164, Feb. 2021,
Art. no. 114039.
[9] T. Guo, P. You, and Z. Yang, “Recommendation of geographic dis-
tributed charging stations for electric vehicles: A game theoretical
approach,” in Proc. IEEE Power Energy Soc. General Meeting , 2017,
pp. 1–5.
[10] L. Ni, B. Sun, X. Tan, and D. H. K. Tsang, “Online price-based
vehicle-to-station recommendations for EV battery swapping,” in Proc.
IEEE Int. Conf. Commun., Control, Comput. Technol. Smart Grids
(SmartGridComm), 2018, pp. 1–6.
[11] G. Wang, Y . Zhang, Z. Fang, S. Wang, F. Zhang, and D. Zhang,
“FairCharge: A data-driven fairness-aware charging recommendation
system for large-scale electric taxi ﬂeets,” Proc. ACM Interact., Mobile,
Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–25, Mar. 2020.
[12] Y . Wu, J. Zhang, A. Ravey, D. Chrenko, and A. Miraoui, “Real-time
energy management of photovoltaic-assisted electric vehicle charging
station by Markov decision process,” J. Power Sources , vol. 476,
Nov. 2020, Art. no. 228504.
[13] H. Lin, X. Lin, H. Labiod, and L. Chen, “Toward multiple-phase MDP
model for charging station recommendation,”IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp.
Syst., vol. 23, no. 8, pp. 10583–10595, Aug. 2022.
[14] M. Khalid, L. Wang, K. Wang, N. Aslam, C. Pan, and Y . Cao, “Deep
reinforcement learning-based long-range autonomous valet parking for
smart cities,” Sustain. Cities Soc. , vol. 89, Feb. 2023, Art. no. 104311.
[15] P. Xu et al., “Real-time fast charging station recommendation for
electric vehicles in coupled power-transportation networks: A graph
reinforcement learning method,” Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst. ,
vol. 141, Oct. 2022, Art. no. 108030.
[16] X. Li, Y . Cao, F. Yan, Y . Li, W. Zhao, and Y . Wang, “Towards
user-friendly energy supplement service considering battery degradation
cost,” Energy, vol. 249, Jun. 2022, Art. no. 123716.
[17] Q. Guo, S. Xin, H. Sun, Z. Li, and B. Zhang, “Rapid-charging
navigation of electric vehicles based on real-time power systems and
trafﬁc data,” IEEE Trans. Smart Grid, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 1969–1979, Jul.
2014.
[18] S. Liu, X. Xia, Y . Cao, Q. Ni, X. Zhang, and L. Xu, “Reservation-
based EV charging recommendation concerning charging urgency
policy,” Sustain. Cities Soc. , vol. 74, Nov. 2021, Art. no. 103150.
[19] J. Tan and L. Wang, “Real-time charging navigation of electric vehicles
to fast charging stations: A hierarchical game approach,” IEEE Trans.
Smart Grid , vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 846–856, Mar. 2017.
[20] J. Zhong, J. Liu, and X. Zhang, “Charging navigation strategy for
electric vehicles considering empty-loading ratio and dynamic electricity
price,” Sustain. Energy, Grids Netw., vol. 34, Jun. 2023, Art. no. 100987.
[21] S. Pareek, A. Sujil, S. Ratra, and R. Kumar, “Electric vehicle charging
station challenges and opportunities: A future perspective,” in Proc.
Int. Conf. Emerg. Trends Commun., Control Comput. (ICONC) , 2020,
pp. 1–6.
[22] Y . An, Y . Gao, N. Wu, J. Zhu, H. Li, and J. Yang, “Optimal scheduling
of electric vehicle charging operations considering real-time trafﬁc
condition and travel distance,” Expert Syst. Appl. , vol. 213, Mar. 2023,
Art. no. 118941.
[23] S. Wang, S. Bi, and Y . A. Zhang, “Reinforcement learning for real-time
pricing and scheduling control in EV charging stations,” IEEE Trans.
Ind. Informat., vol. 17, no. 2, pp. 849–859, Feb. 2021.
[24] Q. Xing, Y . Xu, Z. Chen, Z. Zhang, and Z. Shi, “A graph reinforcement
learning-based decision-making platform for real-time charging naviga-
tion of urban electric vehicles,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Informat. , vol. 19,
no. 3, pp. 3284–3295, Mar. 2023.
[25] R. Wang, Z. Chen, Q. Xing, Z. Zhang, and T. Zhang, “A modiﬁed
rainbow-based deep reinforcement learning method for optimal schedul-
ing of charging station,”Sustainability, vol. 14, no. 3, p. 1884, Feb. 2022.
[26] L. Canese et al., “Multi-agent reinforcement learning: A review of
challenges and applications,” Appl. Sci. , vol. 11, no. 11, p. 4948, May
2021.
[27] W. Zhang et al., “Intelligent electric vehicle charging recommendation
based on multi-agent reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Web Conf., 2021,
pp. 1856–1867.
[28] F. Cui, X. Lin, R. Zhang, and Q. Yang, “Multi-objective optimal schedul-
ing of charging stations based on deep reinforcement learning,” Front.
Energy Res., vol. 10, Jan. 2023, Art. no. 1042882.
[29] A. Kumar, R. Kumar, and A. Aggarwal, “S2RC: A multi-objective route
planning and charging slot reservation approach for electric vehicles
considering state of trafﬁc and charging station,” J. King Saud Univ.
Comput. Inf. Sci. , vol. 34, no. 5, pp. 2192–2206, May 2022.
[30] C. Huang, M. Shi, H. Wang, and Y . Jia, “Optimal charging site
recommendation and scheduling for electric vehicles considering user
price sensitivity,” in Proc. IEEE PES Innov. Smart Grid Technol. Asia
(ISGT Asia), 2022, pp. 449–453.
[31] Z. Tan, L. Liu, J. Wu, and Y . Zhou, “A charging station recommendation
method based on link prediction for cruising electric taxis,” in Proc.
IEEE 25th Int. Conf. Comput. Support. Cooperative Work Design
(CSCWD), 2022, pp. 127–132.
[32] Y . Guo, X. Qian, T. Lei, S. Guo, and L. Gong, “Modeling the
preference of electric shared mobility drivers in choosing charging
stations,” Transp. Res. Part D, Transport Environ., vol. 110, Sep. 2022,
Art. no. 103399.
[33] A. Ibrahim et al., “A recommendation system for electric vehicles
users based on restricted boltzmann machine and waterwheel plant
algorithms,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 145111–145136, 2023.
[34] X. Zuo, J. Bi, Y . Wang, and Y . Du, “A charging guidance optimization
model for electric vehicle travel by considering multi-dimensional
preferences of users,” World Electric Veh. J., vol. 14, no. 7, p. 171, Jun.
2023.
[35] C. Li, Z. Dong, N. Fisher, and D. Zhu, “Coupling user preference
with external rewards to enable driver-centered and resource-aware EV
charging recommendation,” in Proc. Joint Eur. Conf. Mach. Learn.
Knowl. Discov. Databases, 2022, pp. 3–19.
[36] A. Brown, J. Cappellucci, A. Heinrich, and E. Cost, “Electric vehicle
charging infrastructure trends from the alternative fueling station locator:
Third quarter 2023,” U.S. Dept. Energy, Nat. Renew. Energy Lab.
(NREL), Golden, CO, USA, Rep. NREL/TP-5400-88223, 2024.
[37] S. S. G. Acharige, M. E. Haque, M. T. Arif, N. Hosseinzadeh,
K. N. Hasan, and A. M. T. Oo, “Review of electric vehicle
charging technologies, standards, architectures, and converter conﬁgura-
tions,” IEEE Access, vol. 11, pp. 41218–41255, 2023.
[38] U. I. Atmaca, S. Biswas, C. Maple, and C. Palamidessi, “A
privacy-preserving querying mechanism with high utility for elec-
tric vehicles,” IEEE Open J. Veh. Technol. , vol. 5, pp. 262–277,
Jan. 2024.
[39] A. Almarshoodi, J. Keenan, I. Campbell, T. Hassan, M. I. Ibrahem, and
M. M. Fouda, “Security and privacy preservation for future vehicular
transportation systems: A survey,” in Proc. IEEE 12th Int. Conf.
Commun. Syst. Netw. Technol. (CSNT) , 2023, pp. 728–734.
5250 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON CONSUMER ELECTRONICS, VOL. 70, NO. 3, AUGUST 2024
[40] D. Wang, Y . Cao, K.-K. R. Choo, Z. Yang, Z. Sun, and H. Cruickshank,
“Secure battery swapping: A reservation scheme with conditional
privacy-preserving bidirectional heterogeneous aggregate signcryption
and incentive mechanism,” IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., vol. 72, no. 11,
pp. 14087–14102, Nov. 2023.
[41] B. Lindemann, B. Maschler, N. Sahlab, and M. Weyrich, “A
survey on anomaly detection for technical systems using LSTM
networks,” Comput. Ind., vol. 131, Oct. 2021, Art. no. 103498.
Hai Lin (Member, IEEE) received the B.S. degree
from the Department of Thermal Engineering,
Huazhong Sciences and Technologies University,
Wuhan, China, in 1999, the M.S. degree in computer
science from the University of Pierre and Marie
Curie, Paris, France, in 2005, and the Ph.D. degree
from Institute Telecom-Telecom Paris-Tech, Paris, in
2008. He was a Postdoctoral Researcher with France
Telecom. He was a Researcher with ZTE Europe.
Since 2012, he has been with Wuhan University,
Wuhan, where he is currently an Associate Professor
with the School of Cyber Science and Engineering. His research interests
include Internet of Things, edge computing, sensor networks, and future
networks.
Xiaoyu Li received the B.S. degree in information
security from Xidian University, Xi’an, China, in
2021. He is currently pursuing the M.S. degree
in cyberspace security with the School of Cyber
Science and Engineering, Wuhan University. His
research interests include reinforcement learning,
trusted computing, and machine learning.
Yue Cao (Senior Member, IEEE) received the
Ph.D. degree from the Institute for Communication
Systems formerly known as the Centre for
Communication Systems Research, University of
Surrey, Guildford, U.K., in 2013.
Further to the Ph.D. study, he had conducted a
Research Fellow with the University of Surrey, and
an Academic Faculty with Northumbria University,
Newcastle upon Tyne, U.K.; Lancaster University,
Lancaster, U.K.; and Beihang University, Beijing,
China. He is currently a Professor with the School
of Cyber Science and Engineering, Wuhan University, Wuhan, China. His
multidisciplinary research interest focuses on the theme of ITS, including
cyber security, wireless network, and service optimization.
Prof. Cao has been also the Fellow of the British Computer Society, the
Royal Society of Arts, and the Higher Education Academy.
Houda Labiod is a Full Professor with the
Department INFRES (Computer Science and
Network Department), Telecom Paris, France.
She recently joined Huawei Technologies R&D
Paris Research Centre. She was the Head of the
Research Group Cybersecurity for Communication
and Networking, Telecom Paris from 2015 to 2018.
She is a Founder of IFIP NTMS Conference. She
published six books and more than 250 research
articles in these areas. She was a Co-Leader of
the Chair C3S on Cybersecurity for connected and
autonomous vehicles with French partners Renault, Valéo, Thalès, Nokia, and
Wavestone for four years. Her current research interests include security in
new generation communication networks (6G, NGI), security in cooperative
ITS, and cooperation in wireless and autonomous networks. She served as
an associate editor and a member of the editorial board for several journals.
Naveed Ahmad (Member, IEEE) received the
degree in computer science from the Department of
Computer Science, University of Peshawar, Pakistan,
in 2007, and the Ph.D. degree in computer sci-
ence from the Centre for Communication System
Research, University of Surrey, U.K., in 2013.
He is currently an Associate Professor with the
College of Computer and Information Sciences,
Prince Sultan University, Saudi Arabia. Prior to his
current position, he was an Assistant Professor with
the Department of Computer Science, University
of Peshawar. He worked in the area of cyber security, privacy, blockchain
technology, and penetration testing.
